URL: https://www2.statmt.org/wmt25/pdf/2025.wmt-1.73.pdf
Type: PDF
Length: 30047 chars (truncated)

--- Content ---

Proceedings of the Tenth Conference on Machine Translation (WMT), Volume 2: Shared Task Papers, pages 984–993
November 8–9, 2025. ©2025 Association for Computational Linguistics
984
Can QE-informed (Re)Translation lead to Error Correction?
Govardhan Padmanabhan
Institute for People-Centred AI
University of Surrey, United Kingdom
gp00816@surrey.ac.uk
Abstract
The paper presents two approaches submit-
ted to the WMT 2025 Automated Translation
Quality Evaluation Systems Task 3 - Quality
Estimation (QE)-informed Segment-level Er-
ror Correction. While jointly training QE sys-
tems with Automatic Post-Editing (APE) has
shown improved performance for both tasks,
APE systems are still known to overcorrect
the output of Machine Translation (MT), lead-
ing to a degradation in performance.
We
investigate a simple training-free approach -
QE-informed Retranslation, and compare it
with another within the same training-free
paradigm. Our winning approach selects the
highest-quality translation from multiple can-
didates generated by different LLMs. The sec-
ond approach, more akin to APE, instructs an
LLM to replace error substrings as specified
in the provided QE explanation(s).
A con-
ditional heuristic was employed to minimise
the number of edits, with the aim of max-
imising the Gain-to-Edit ratio. The two pro-
posed approaches achieved a ∆COMET score
of 0.0201 and −0.0108, respectively, leading
the first approach to achieve the winning posi-
tion on the subtask leaderboard.
1
Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) have advanced
the field of Machine Translation (MT), given their
support for longer input context length and abil-
ity to generate text in a natural tone. However,
translation quality is still limited for languages
other than English and for domain-specific transla-
tions (Fernandes et al., 2025). Evaluating MT out-
put for quality is critical to understand the reliabil-
ity and suitability of translation systems, and more
importantly, to be able to perform accurate cor-
rections. The WMT24 Metrics Shared Task found
that neural-based learned metrics like COMET or
xCOMET were superior when evaluating LLM-
generated translations, compared to the traditional
statistical metrics like BLEU, or chrF (Freitag
et al., 2024).
As LLMs are typically trained on a large gen-
eral dataset, performance in domain-specific MT
can often fall short as they may not properly
render key terminologies or stylistic conventions.
As such, Automatic Post-Editing (APE) is vital
to fixing MT errors. However, they are prone to
overcorrecting. One such example of mitigating
over-correcting, proposed by Deoghare et al.
(2025), is to utilize word-level Quality Estimation
(QE) to limit edits only on the specified error
segments. Despite recent efforts to reduce over-
correction (Deoghare et al., 2023, 2024), APE
models still fall short of the required semanti-
cally coherent output.
Therefore, we ask the
titular question - “Can QE-informed re-translation
help overcome MT errors?”, and discuss two
approaches as a comparative evaluation.
This paper describes two participation systems,
both utilizing pre-trained and open-source LLMs,
for the WMT 2025 Automated Translation Qual-
ity Evaluation Systems Task 3 - QE-informed
Segment-level Error Correction. The primary ap-
proach leverages multiple LLMs for MT and se-
lects the best output using QE. In the secondary
approach, an LLM is prompted to replace error-
segments in the provided MT. These error seg-
ments are identified by the explainable QE pro-
vided within the dataset.
2
Related Work
Quality Estimation (QE)
QE is an automated
evaluation framework that predicts a score indicat-
ing whether the translation is good or not (Yvon,
2019). COMET (Cross-Lingual Optimized Met-
ric for Evaluation of Translation) is an automatic
metric to evaluate the quality of machine trans-
lation using deep learning models (Rei et al.,

985
Figure 1: Domain distribution within each language
2020). COMETKiwi is a hybrid machine transla-
tion quality estimation (MTQE) model that com-
bines COMET and OpenKiwi (Rei et al., 2022).
It achieved top performance in the WMT 2022
shared task and has since been widely adopted as
a state-of-the-art benchmark in MTQE.
Automatic Post-Editing (APE)
APE is an auto-
mated system that corrects MT output, without hu-
man involvement (do Carmo et al., 2021). Chatter-
jee et al. (2018) describe combining QE and APE
in three ways: using QE as an APE activator when
the MT output is poor, as guidance to help the APE
decoder decide which tokens to change, and as a
selector to choose between the raw MT and post-
edited output.
WMT24 QE-APE
The previous year’s WMT
competition focused on sentence-level quality es-
timation and error span predictions (Zerva et al.,
2024).
QE was further incorporated into APE.
The dataset for the QE-APE primarily consisted
of English–Hindi (En-Hi) and English–Tamil (En-
Ta) pairs. The source (SRC) English sentence, the
target (TGT) translation provided by an unspeci-
fied neural machine translator, and a human post-
edit (PE) version of the translation made by native
speakers were included to support both quality es-
timation and automatic post-editing tasks.
The HW-TSC team (Yu et al., 2024) utilized
Llama3-8B-Instruct for En-Hi pairs. The
model first underwent continual pretraining using
low-rank adaptation (LoRA) on SRC and TGT
data, and was further supervised fine-tuned on the
PE data with a custom prompt. For En-Ta pairs,
they trained a custom transformer then performed
APE fine-tuning. This system achieved 0.851 and
0.918 COMET scores for En-Hi and En-Ta trans-
lation tasks, respectively.
The IT-Unbabel team utilized xTower for gen-
erating corrected translations, along with a qual-
ity estimation model to decide whether to use the
original translation or the xTower output. This
approach achieved 0.8646 COMET score for En-
Hi pairs, and 0.9163 for En-Ta pairs.
IT-Unbabel’s solution of utilizing an LLM
along with QE as a selector served as the inspi-
ration for the primary approach
3
Methodology
3.1
Dataset Analysis
The complete test data provided with the task
was exclusively used.
This dataset consists of
6, 000 machine translations from English to Chi-
nese, Czech, Japanese, Icelandic, Russian, and
Ukrainian, with 1, 000 instances for each language
pair. The texts cover a range of domains, specif-
ically news, social, speech, literary, and dialogue.
As shown in Figure 1, the domains are not evenly
distributed. The news domain is the most promi-
nent overall with 1, 808 entries, while the dialogue

986
Figure 2: System performance in hypothesis_segment
domain has the lowest representation with 28 seg-
ments, all appearing only in the English-to-Czech
group.
The original translations under the “hypoth-
esis_segment” column were generated by 38
different translation systems, including LLMs
like GPT4.1, Claude-4, DeepSeek-v3, and
more. Figure 2 shows the five best and worst sys-
tems according to their average translation quality
scores.
3.2
Approaches
3.2.1
Primary Approach - “Best MT Wins”
In this approach, multiple LLMs were used to
translate the English texts from scratch, without
additional information or context. The resulting
candidate translations were then evaluated with
the wmt22-cometkiwi-da model, which provided
QE scores based on the source English text and
translated system outputs.
The translation with
the highest QE score was selected as the final out-
put. By re-framing the APE task as re-translation,
QE serves as a selector in place of traditional de-
coders.
Similar approaches have also been ex-
plored, where QE is used in multi-hypothesis se-
lection (Yu et al., 2024; Laki and Yang, 2018; Lu
and Zhang, 2019), further supporting the view of
QE as a decision mechanism in MT improvement.
This approach therefore functions as a systematic
probe of QE-based re-ranking, illustrating both its
potential to establish an empirical upper bound
on metric-based performance and its lim
